I have a very personal relationship to
this bookstore um I was a student very
close by here an undergraduate um from a
foreign country and um when I could get
my spirits up I would bike to this
bookstore um and spend time here and
it's there's something wonderful about
things coming back um and so thank you
very much for having me here um and
thank you for those really wonderful
words of praise uh I must say though my
favorite uh uh praise that I've received
for the book uh came this morning when I
was reading through my emails and
someone sent me a little u a note uh
from some blogger who says are there
cliff notes for the Emperor of all
melodies and it was my it's been my
lifelong ambition to have a book to
which there are Cliff
Notes so um if anyone is inspired to
write cliff notes please let me know I'd
be
delighted um
I I thought I would begin today rather
than talking about um the content of the
book um I thought I would begin today by
talking about process because that's
more interesting it's something you
don't get from just reading the book
itself uh sort of a behindth scenes look
about what motivated some parts of the
book and how they got written um first I
have to offer a note of apology which is
of course that this book was when when
it was finally handed in as in its draft
form was was three times its length um
uh and by necessity a vast amount of
information had to be cut you cannot
there is a fundamental you know my my my
editor said 500 pages is the final limit
no more and we ended up with about 600
and that was a bargain um but
nonetheless um so I I have to start with
the with a note of apology saying that
not every story could make it into the
book um so I would welcome other
attempts to write um further histories
of of of a disease that will continue to
be part of our lives in the in the
future um that said um I um wanted to
talk a little bit about uh as I said the
process of writing the book and and the
first moment the most one of the most
pivotal moments in the writing of the
book happened sometime early on when I
was when I was confronting the the
vastness of the challenge and the
vastness of the challenge is here you
have a history that spans about 4,000
audio years and there about a 100 odd
characters that move in and out of the
book uh there are scientific terms um
there's sometimes and their political
terms there's politics science and of
course in the middle of all of this are
this kind of wh of stories and um I was
having a conversation with my with my
very excellent editor Nan Graham um and
she said to me something very pivotal
she said um we were talking about
something completely different and she
said in the end
said if if one forgets the book
publishing industry so if one forgets
for a second the vast paraphernalia that
allows a book to come into play the
bookstore the you know the actual
product the printer the the the business
of bookmaking the marketing Etc she said
you know in the end a book is an amazing
instrument by which one author sitting
alone in a room can talk to One reader
sitting alone in a room and that comment
resonated with me very deeply because I
thought to myself well if you forget for
for a second the vast paraphernalia of
medicine the CAT scans the MRIs the the
billion dooll devices the National
Cancer Institute the wonderful crown
jewels of medicine that exist in this
country and others in the end the act of
medicine is a mechanism by which one
person sitting alone in the room can
talk to another person sitting alone in
a room one doctor sitting alone in a
room can talk to one patient sitting
alone in a room um and that analogy was
very deep for me um because it reminded
me what was about what was essential and
what was not essential and the essential
piece of it was that much like a book
medicine is about storytelling medicine
begins with the most shamanic act um if
you take away all its paraphernalia
ultimately medicine begins with someone
saying tell me your story what happened
um and that is the first thing that
happens when you meet a doctor um is
that you begin to unpack um a story and
and as I make a claim in the book The
Doctors then tell a story back um to you
um and it's this interchange it's an
ancient interchange probably one of the
most ancient one of the most um ancient
interchanges that we have as human
beings um and that itself that process
in itself begins Begins the unpacking or
unburdening of an ill of an illness um
long before you receive your first dose
of whatever medicine you will or will
not receive it is the unburdening of a
story that is the first first shamanic
Act of medicine and actually if you
forget that it seems to me that
something very important will stop
happening in medicine um and once I had
come to that realization again inspired
by this comment um it began to become
very clear to me how one could write
this book um again remembering that
there was a vast history here but it
could be written Through The Eyes of
patients it could be written by telling
stories and if I could tell stories um
that began and at whatever point of time
4,000 years ago and if I could fulfill
those stories if I could flesh out these
stories then what would what seemed like
an insurmountable problem which is how
does one tell this history um would
become actually solvable um which is
tell the history by moving from story to
story to story typically focusing on
those who were right there those who
experienced it most directly and that is
patience now again that was the the
solution in principle of the problem but
then that raises a second question which
is how does one find these missing
stories um how how does one uncover the
the story of a woman who experienced
breast cancer in the 1950s remember um I
I I recount um a moment in time in 1950
in fact when a young when a woman uh
Fanny Rosen now uh calls up the New York
Times and she says I'd like to place an
advertisement um for survivors of breast
cancer and the New York Times the
society editor gets on the phone and
says well miss roseno actually you know
we can't print the words breast and
cancer in the New York Times what if we
said um we were this was a survivors
group of women with diseases of the
chest wall um this is 1950 and actually
when the New York Times came to came to
write about my book I said to chip
mcrath I said make sure you print that
because it's a reminder for us all of us
including us on doctors that we we need
to be humble about you know what what
can and cannot be achieved here um so
this was the back background again these
missing stories a word that can't be
uttered uh a word that's whispered about
um the big sea um and again the question
was you know what were the stories um
and one thread that came very early on
is that I knew that somewhere in this
story would have to be the story of one
of the most remarkable um uh women um in
recent Med in recent intellectual
history and that is Mary Lasker Mary
Lasker who um um among many other things
directed her philanthropic energies she
was a very unusual woman for her times
um an entrepreneur um a um person who
then directed an enormous amount of
philanthropic energy towards um solving
um as he as she put it um uh
transforming the geography of American
Health the landscape of American Health
and if if if if if there was one sort of
central character spinning through the
story it would be Mary Lasker and from
Mary Lasker then it very quickly um I I
I found Sydney Farber who actually
Begins the book Sydney Farber was Mary
lasker's friend scientific collaborator
and if Mary Lasker gave uh political
legitimacy to the war on cancer Sydney
Farber provided a kind of scientific
legitimacy for um for for the for the
war on cancer so the book then begins
with Sydney Farber um Sydney Farber was
a pathologist um uh we begin in the
1940s he was a doctor he was so-called
the doctor of the dead because in
primarily Pathologists in the 1950s
would perform autopsies it was very um
he was a pathologist who specialized in
children's um pathology and um typically
uh bodies of children who had died in
the hospital would be wheeled down into
his basement laboratory the laboratory
was no bigger than about you know 12T by
by about 12T kind of a frozen Cube at
the bottom of of one of the buildings at
the Dana farbor so that's where we are
in 1948
and then um Farber became interested in
trying to find uh a mechanism or or an
understanding of a disease which was ex
extremely lethal a swiftly lethal form
of cancer and that was childhood acute
lymphoblastic lukemia and that's where
our Story begins um uh lymphoblastic
leukemia is a disease that typically
although not always affects children um
and usually uh in the 1950s it was
almost uniformly lethal 100% mortality
often kids would die they would be
diagnosed um within and they would die
in the span of a week two weeks
sometimes they would live longer and
then die soon after so Farber became
particularly interested in this and one
of the reasons was that leukemia unlike
many other forms of cancer could be
counted and as I talk about in this book
science begins with measurement whenever
you can measure something you can begin
to perform a scientific activity on it
and this was a time before CAT scans and
MRIs so it was very hard to count the
size of an internal tumor cuz it was
buried inside